# isolation_forest
This repository holds an implementation of the anomaly detection algorithm Isolation Forest, in python. The implementation was carried out as an assignment from the course Problem Solving in Python - MSDS 689, for the Masters of Science in Data Science program at University of San Francisco. A project description can be found at the following link:

https://github.com/parrt/msds689/blob/master/projects/iforest/iforest.md

A simple explanation of the algorithm as follows:
Anomaly detection is a type of problem in which "anomalies" must be distinguished from the rest of the normal data. Typically, previous anomaly detection algorthims have focused on the normal data, and then identifying any strange outliers from the expected normal. Isolation forests focus on the outliers, and attempt to identify these rather than focusing on the normal data. The isolation forest is a collection of isolation trees. An isolation tree is a tree of the same structure as a binary search tree. The tree recursively selects a random feature from the data, which is a 2-D array typically, where each row is an observation. Once a random column is selected, a random value between the min/max of that column is selected. This is our split value on which we divide the tree. Any row in which the columns value is less than or equal to the split value is sent down the left branch, and the rest of the data is sent down the right. This pattern is repeated until either the size of data is one, or we have gone as deep as the max tree height (a parameter decided on tree definition). Now, from here we can attempt to detect anomalies. As we have compared them to outliers already, we should expect that anomalies will be easier to split apart from the rest of the data. Thus, if you define path length as the number of edges required to reach the leaf node from the top of the tree, an anomaly will have a lower expected path length than a standard normal data point. Please feel free to reach out with any questions regarding the implenetation here to me at brianwright2171@gmail.com
